Recording made by Glenys James in Ponoka, Alberta on the 3rd of July 1974 with several
members of the Welsh settlement. The interviews are in English and in Welsh, starting in English
with Griffith Jones, followed by a group interview with Hugh Roberts, Mrs Annie Roberts, Kelt
Hughes, Evan Thomas, Garonwy Davies and Yorwith Davies.
Mr Griffith Jones, you were born in Canada of Welsh parents.
Since we did not speak Welsh in the home, I didn't learn Welsh when I should have and I
regret it since. However, I do like to hear the Welsh and one of the biggest thrills I had in
visiting Wales this summer was to hear the little children speak it. It sounded good. Dad
came from Wales, Tre Gyrfaen, first in 1891 and after several trips back came out again in 1910
and settled in the Wood River District. Mother is of Welsh, was of Welsh parents and she came from
the United States to Canada in 1902 and they were married in 1911. There were four of us that were
born to them and probably I speak as good of Welsh as any of them which isn't very good.
Now your father was well known in the area here for his Welsh writing of England Neon both Welsh
and English. He was well known all over North America in fact because he contributed to the
Welsh papers and he competed in all the Welsh Estadwods that he could with his England Neon
and he won many prizes with them. Can you recall any of these England Neon that he wrote? I could
say one in English. As you know the England must have consonants that harmonize and one that he
won a prize on in English was Lindy how well he landed in Paris though peril confronted. Gritty
Yank with great head away he went undaunted. I wish I could say some of them in the Welsh
because they sounded very musical even to my Canadian ears. When you visited Wales this year
for the first time what else impressed you about Wales and the Welsh way of life? We had the good
fortune to attend the command begone in Rosanus Grigogh and this gave us one of our biggest thrills
and also to see the old churches and houses where dad lived where he went to church and some of the
farms that he trampled over looking after his Welsh sheep. We met many of my cousins too whom
I had never seen and one thing that really impressed me especially in the Kiriogh Valley
was the way everyone spoke Welsh and they would rather speak Welsh than English. Did you have a
chance to practice your Welsh there? Oh yes I had many opportunities and we are looking forward to
going back again as soon as possible possibly two years. Wednesday the 3rd of July in Ponoka.
Now Mr. Hugh Roberts, do you remember the story of the chapel in Wood River when it started?
Yes, the chapel started in 1914. The Welsh church was open in Ponoka beyond the chapel in Wood River.
delicious clouds
They benefited all form of food, of water but the Welsh
oðan brygethin seisnag in a dreag, in cymraeg, in a hlad.
Beða amur a skol síl?
Well, a skol síl cali gynnal in cymraeg í gyd, ond o'n genan í un klas o seisnag.
Oða dynion ar wahán ír merchain, a r plant, oða dynion í gyd a dyn ochor ír capal,
a r merchain in a cannel, a wedan a klas seisnag ar yr ochor arall ír capal.
Og oða pobolan wald hin, in dipyn, in hryfat, oðan oðan ír capal í gweld dynion í gyd a r un ochor,
a merchain gyd in lefal, prula arall.
Og oðan í likjór, a tréfniad, in a nodá achos oðan ín gallu cannu,
a dyn, dupyn gwell oðan ín gael dyn bacha support in gilidh, in cannu tenor a cannu mas.
Tía, hamsar röbal kinta, röbal báur kinta, oða gynan ír rullat í a hannar kant í kantu bobol dvod ír capal,
a rhaeo röbal í fanc plant, gallu röbal seisnagar inni.
Faint o gymraeg dara'ch ddydsgu pan o'ch i ymblentin in yr capal?
Wel, oðan ín ddydsgu yr rabi ekk, a gddydsgu rállandi pinnár beibíl.
Dóðan haid a hórn had, ór sír von rullatja 1860, a ganwyd vinn had en Récí in Wisconsin.
Ír nusumid vedin ír ardal rón Cambria a Randolph, Wisconsin, a gyn fan ír ganwyd fi.
Ír canada, a ná blodin 1907 í Southern Alberta, Magrath, a gyn 1911, ír ardal yma ír ddew.
Pam ná rách i ddewis yr ardal yma?
Wel, dwn i ddim yn dweud achos bod na Cymru yma, ac yn haelid yn Cymru.
Wedi cael sychgy allan yn Southern Alberta yma.
Gwlad Gorsuch oedd hi, ac oedd na lot o law o'r ma, a i bwrw bobbydd i ysio, fynd os o'r ni yma 1911.
A ffarmio fi o'ch i neud yn yr ardal yma felly?
Wel, dwi yn hadd ddew, ond chydig iawn ar ol dwad yma.
Ia ffarw yn 1914, ac ffarmio hefo fy mam nestas yn i ddew i'r dre i yn 1934.
A'n i'r busnes.
Gwrthyd Machinery, John Deere Farm Machinery.
Ond di chi'n dal i ffarmio heddiw?
No, dwi deyfodd, ma plant wedi cymbe drosodd ar busnes, ac dwi'n anfarmio.
A faint o dir sy'n bydda chi yma?
Well, they are 1300 acres.
Mrs Annie Roberts o Penoca.
Dwi'n ennui yn Alberta, ac dwi'n cofi a lot o hyn a nesion ar round Wood River a fel ffydda'r Lady's Aid yn cwarfod.
A fo unwaith a flwyddyn ffydda bursar.
A ffydda'r haid Celtic and Supper a phaw ffyn dweud a bwyd a gwrthu fo beth a beth a.
A'n wneud arian, deygen arian i roi di'r dynion i rydych i heth a phaw.
A picnics of course, a ffydda'n aethem wau ar round na.
Dwi'n bina contest a ffydda knocking nails to women, oedd un o'r contest o gynnyn nhw.
A beth athra fi wrth i we, oedd y llall.
Ond a dda'n neud i gael a lot o hwyl efo pethau fel a.
Pan o'n i gyd yn ar un i beth oedd a'n i neud, oedd mynd i'r bursar na unwaith a flwyddyn.
Bli dysgo chi siarad Cymraeg?
O athra.
A wedyn dysgo ti'n bech o dallan yn Cymraeg yn yr ysgol siwr.
Ond fe ganwyd chi yma yn Alberta, a chi enw i chi'n dod o Gymru?
O be a beth a.
A dda' ma'n dod o Dolgella yn had o Llanfri Maer.
Dwi'n cofio thydig o, oes de ddod o, oedd a yn yr ysgol bach, ysgol magic pan o'n i yn blentyn.
Dwi'n cofio, roedd hynny ar yr y Blackwood.
Competition.
Ac recitations, solos a ddau llun cael eu canu.
Competition, everything was competitions.
Yn Cymraeg o chyn cystadlu felly?
Yn Cymraeg ac yn Cysneg. Peth Cysneg, beth Cymraeg. Rhanwya'n Cymraeg.
I dim ond o plant oedd yn cystadlu neu oedd cystradlu?
Oedd o fobom ni o'n oed hefyd, o'n plant rhanwya'w o'n plant.
A phryd oedd hyn yn digwydd?
Well, 1912, olafornu.
Ac dwi oedd o'n dal ysteadhota ar ol hynny hefyd.
I don't know if I can remember.
Conductors of Calgary, Judicators rather, of Calgary.
That's the one I think.
Oh, 1950, 1950.
Olafornu, yes.
I was going to say that, but it doesn't get my voice.
I thought to steer the trailer on cash,
I knew the cabal had the same grass.
Go set the people on the ground,
keep the clothes on the ground.
And say it all in the cabal,
common in the olifo.
You people common, and free.
Common in the olifo, the guys who work in the primary building.
You say it all.
I'm going to try that.
Oh, right.
Oh.
I don't know what he's doing,
but he's making a noise in the car.
He's going to turn the lights off.
That's what I'm saying.
Yeah.
Thomas Hughes was born in 1906.
In 1907, he was admitted to the Bans Hall.
He was building a team,
and he was selling store at the butcher shop.
And he was traveling around,
and he was a team of little guys,
and he was making cake,
and bread, groceries, candy, and pop.
And he was making a lot of cake,
and he was a little old,
I remember,
but he was old,
and he was always in the hall.
And he told one story about Thomas Hughes.
Someone was picking nickels and dimes here,
on the floor.
And when he was still here,
Thomas Hughes was watching the buggy,
and he saw a couple of them,
and he saw a crack in the buggy,
and he thought,
that's one way.
But Thomas Hughes,
a lot of people thought of Thomas Hughes,
and he handed it to people at the time,
even though there was no store within 10 meters,
and only a few of us went there.
And a lot of people came there
to buy groceries from Thomas Hughes.
Thomas Hughes was a young man,
and he was a young man,
and he had a band of hope.
And we were young,
and we had a band of hope.
Thomas Hughes was so good at it,
and he had a lot of money,
and Thomas Hughes had a lot of money,
and he liked it.
Jarvis Davis.
I was a small boy going to church.
Well, when the communion was passed,
it was passed by Thomas Hughes,
and he would have the wine first,
and then he'd pass it along,
and he'd sing one of the old hymns
that they used to sing for this ceremony.
And anyway, I had heard that people having wine
was apt to get a bit gay once in a while,
and I said to Dad, I said,
Is he drunk, Dad?
I said, I'm not going to drink.
I'm going to read very good books with Dad over that.
Mrs. Hughes and Mrs. Thomas Jones
came from Wales on the same boat
and also on the same train.
And while traveling on the train,
she had put, she carried a picture of John Bunyan with her,
and while on the train,
and when she wanted to retrieve this picture,
she asked the trainman,
Will you reach me John Bunyan, please?
The trainman looked quite astonished.
He couldn't figure out what it was all about.
When we first came into the district here,
there was four Hugh Joneses.
One we called Hugh D.,
the other Hugh T.,
the other Hugh H., and the other Hugh W.
We never mentioned the Joneses,
there were so many Joneses in the district.
The same thing pretty well applied to the William Joneses.
We had William Reese Jones, we had William Jones,
we had William T. Jones,
and we called them Will T., Will Reese, and William Jones.
We had to have a little respect for him because he was the older.
You didn't give them any nicknames?
No, not really, just initials.
We just used initials.
Could you tell me some of the reasons why the Welsh people came to this area?
Well, I think mainly they came because of cheap land.
We could get homesteads there.
You paid $10 for a quarter section,
and you had to farm it.
You had to live on it for three years.
You had to produce it,
you had to live on it for three years,
you had to prove up on it.
You had to cultivate 30 acres
and put $500 worth of improvements on it before you could get title.
Another reason was that a lot of them had lived in the dry areas
of southern Alberta
and also many different parts of the United States.
This was considered a wet area,
lots of timber, lots of water,
I don't know, other reasons, no doubt.
Then after one Welsh family had came here,
naturally it attracted others.
Their relatives and friends came here.
That's about all I think.
Who would you say was the first Welsh person to come to the area?
Well, I think mainly the people who came to the area
were the first people who came to the area.
They were the first people who came to the area.
Well, I think maybe Karl Morris might have been one of the very first ones.
And Reverend D.L. Hughes,
a Welsh minister, came here in the very early days.
When would that be?
About 1900 I would think.
Most people seemed like,
what we call the early settlers,
seemed to settle in this area around 1900.
And they were the first people to come to the area.
And what we call the early settlers seemed to settle in this area around the turn of the century.
No answer.
1899, didn't they, 10 kids?
No, no.
I thought he said that.
And they made him the drake to be.
He was the right drake.
He was the right drake to be, down there with the men.
Saying that there were Welsh people in the area,
and that was a nice view.
Having read in the brief.
And John Lewis was kind of real estate, wasn't he, Paul?
Yeah.
And this.
I remember Robert Jones,
because he worked on the telephone gang in 1912.
We were, as children,
in Darlaniddh,
in the village of Tilla,
near Polion.
And we started speaking Welsh.
And we would sit there, and the woman would say,
Mom, there's someone there who speaks Welsh.
And I remember, I thought,
maybe I should go to that village.
The minute the crew went out,
that's where we were, down in the village.
And that's from Tarlorn, Anglesey.
I was born in Canada
on May 1927.
29th of May 1927.
And I was born on the 3rd of June.
I was a farmer
in Maymont, Saskatchewan.
I was born in Camraig, in Bangor, Saskatchewan.
I was born in Patagonians.
I'm just a little bit older on the left.
I'm from Amarillo, ancestors.
I was working in Melville.
And I was in Penoca
in March 1929.
I was working there,
and whatever,
until the end of the 19th century.
And then I...
West, what's the name of West?
Corcheawin. Corcheawin.
And then I was born in Farr.
And then, on the 10th of May,
I went to Renwlad.
Well, it was a lot of new things.
A lot of new things, I don't know,
but things were new at West.
Well, prosperous.
And I don't think it was new,
but it was new.
And I was in the same place
when I was born,
on the 7th of July.
You can't remember?
Yes. I remember that the other
depression started in 1942,
I think, at that time.
And in the city of Penholden,
train station at the airport,
in Renwlad, Penholden,
40 miles from me, 10,000 miles up in Oca.
And then, you know, at Falkhuis,
there was Thomas Hughes,
Robert Jones, Jeffreys,
and Amarillo, and I was there,
but they were looking for another one.
It was for completion,
and that's when I came into the job.
And I went to the school there,
but 500 miles away from me
on the same dot on my left—
quit that Wopeman,
well on this side,
it was like I was moving forward then.
The word left, looked cardiovascular.
They差élize a lot of radio stations.
There were cameras.
CS, CW, ..."c Camera.
C River.
Nóná proudhán.
C dire.
Jim Canada on all of us.
That's in the command of our garden.
Yeah.
My daughter went right over here, she said.
Garonnoy Davis of Penoefe.
I even had a daughter by a mam in 1906.
Nothing had.
I had a daughter by a mam in 1907.
There's a daughter by a mam in May 1907.
My mam liked to go to the chapel.
I knew a lot of the chapel.
And she went to the chapel around there in the school.
A little bit across the street.
And from 1916 we built a new chapel.
In the city.
And the first pastor, I'm sure, was Jeffress.
He was a little boy.
And Mr. Jeffress was not a priest.
And we built a chapel around the town.
Well, I think I remember, in the year or two, last night, we built it.
And it's a bit of a waste.
We built a chapel from...
Well, a chapel from Wales.
The chapel was built in Wales in 1921.
Oh, it was 1920.
And then after that, the chapel was in the middle of Wales and the middle of the city.
But when I was a little boy, I went to Scotland.
In the school, around there.
And then in the chapel, then.
And we were teaching at the road mam.
And Tada and Mamma were teaching us in the school.
And when we were growing up, we went to watch classes.
And when we were in the 16th or 17th grade, we were in the adult class.
And we were teaching Welsh in the school.
And we had a Bible that was in Welsh, that was in English.
And we had a lot of fun trying to get different interpretations of the Bible in Welsh and the Bible in Welsh.
At the beginning of the school, the magic school, we couldn't speak Welsh.
We couldn't speak English, we could only speak Welsh.
And what we were teaching was through the school.
And we were taught all three classes when we were little.
The first year in the magic school.
And the magic school was around the whole of the children of Wales.
Some of the different languages there, but Welsh was the most.
It was magic for a couple of years.
I have a lot of friends who went to school and went to school in the same school as me.
Some of them were older.
And the school was very different from the rest of the children.
But talking about the school.
We had a school here in the early 1900s to before 1910.
And carried on for several years.
Then it carried on until about 1925 or somewhere in that neighborhood.
And then for a while we didn't have Stelwood again until the 1930s, the end of the 1930s.
And then they petered out.
And after about a lapse of 10, 15 years, we, descendants of the Welsh in Woodriver,
again started up the Stelwood, which is now called the Woodriver Festival.
And we are carrying on to this day, which is an annual event.
During the first festivals when I was a child, it consisted of music, elocution,
handiworks, such as making halters of things, cooking, and writing limericks.
These were competitive festivals.
And a lot of the singing was competitive.
Classes were old and young, even for the ones over 50.
Choirs were quite prominent.
And at that time, nearly all the Welsh people could sing that were here.
There were several quartets in one competition, and it was quite competitive.
And some of the choirs that were in this community were led by some of the Welsh people that came over from Wales.
And I think the tradition is still carrying on.
The Welsh people are still able to sing, and the Welsh songs are quite close to the heart
of most of the young people in the district at the present time.